Week 5 answers
Diplomacy comprehends short-term political and diplomatic coordination when dealing with third parties, without involving the actual use of military means. Military alliances generally involve some degree of policy coordination when dealing with the external environment, particularly in negotiating with actors that represent a source of threat. Such coordination represents a cost in terms of freedom of action, because it forces them to adopt some policies that they would never adopt otherwise, or to abstain from adopting a preferred policy. Diplomatic coordination can be relatively spontaneous when there are similar preferences, or can be the result of management of the alliance. When there are different preferences, diplomatic coordination can be considered an act of influence and power between allies. Bargaining between a target state and members of an alliance is much more complicated than what happens in a dyadic interaction. Consequently, the absence of diplomatic coordination can make any kind of coercive diplomacy unsuccessful (see ‘Japanese fear of abandonment and renewal of the alliance’ in Chapter 3 and ‘Diplomatic coordination and the Six-Party Talks’ in Chapter 4) (Christensen, 2011; Davis, 2000; Powell, 2002). Lack of coordination renders groups as a whole less transparent and makes it more difficult to engage or isolate a third party. Poor diplomatic coordination can increase the likelihood that an alliance will send unclear and misleading signals to adversaries. When poorly coordinated alliances send messages that undercut credible threats, or credible assurances, stable coercive diplomacy with third parties can be hard to maintain (Christensen, 2011, pp. 4–5). Diplomatic coordination is therefore one of the fundamental arenas within which intra-allied competition takes place. When there is a divergence of interests, allies try to obtain conformity from their partners, in order to achieve policy coordination. Such a divergence can be defined using a bipolar spectrum (cooperation vs. defection). Cooperation involves allies that have developed a similar diplomatic stance according to their interests, or one of the partners compels the other to align itself to its position. Defection is defined by the presence of a different position over a relevant diplomatic issue or toward a third state.

As Generation Y enters the world of higher education, it lays down for itself rules of good behavior. Below are the “safe space policy” rules of the Edinburgh University Student Association, as updated in 2014.[1] They stipulate good behavior at student meetings. From a cursory review of the press, the rules do not seem to be outside the emerging norm.


EUSA safe space policy


Members are expected to respect the right of all students attending Student Council (and related meetings) and staff to enjoy EUSA as a safe space environment, defined as a space which is welcoming and safe and includes the prohibition of discriminatory language and actions.

EUSA operates a Zero Tolerance Policy towards discrimination based on:

Age

Class

Disability

Gender and Gender Identity

Marriage and Civil Partnership

Political Affiliation

Pregnancy and Maternity

Race and Ethnicity

Religion and Belief

Sexual Orientation

EUSA does not discriminate against anybody on the grounds that they are a sex worker (whorephobia).

All Council meetings shall be conducted with an assumption that the meeting shall constitute a ‘safe space’ for the conduct of debate, discussion, and decision-making.

A meeting shall be deemed to be a safe space where no-one is disadvantaged or discouraged from contributing, so long as they respect others’ ability to contribute; and where the principle of equal opportunities is respected.

All members are expected to conduct themselves in a manner which is respectful and considerate of the contributions of others. This isdefined as:

Allowing Council members to speak when called upon by the chair.

Refraining from speaking over, interrupting, heckling, laughing at or otherwise distracting from the speaker who holds the floor.

Refraining from hand gestures which denote disagreement or in any other way indicating disagreement with a point or points being made. Disagreements should only be evident through the normal course of debate.

Avoiding using gestures which are not generally known or accepted by Council.

Gestures indicating agreement are permissible if these gestures are generally understood and not used in an intimidating manner.

Applause is acceptable when a motion is passed only, not if a motion fails to pass. Otherwise, the agreement should be made clear within debate contributions.

Where any member of the meeting (including the chair) is violating safe space policy, any student can call for a vote on their expulsion from the meeting.

In the event that the expulsion of a member is called for, a vote shall be held amongst those members present.

In the event that this vote passes by a simple majority of those in the room, the member shall be required to leave the meeting, and the meeting shall not resume until the member has left.

Such an expulsion will not last beyond the particular meeting concerned unless the procedures laid out in the Good Conduct Regulations are invoked.

 Social Media


Members are asked to pay attention to the effect that use of social media can have on whether EUSA and EUSA-related meetings constitute a ‘Safe Space’ for all members.


 While social media is of necessity partly a ‘private’ space – someone’s Facebook or Twitter account are their own space, and therefore cannot be regulated by EUSA’s Safe Space policy in the same way as meetings; they also are ‘public’ spaces in that, particularly in the case of Twitter, they are publicly available and searchable.


 Social media messages, whether sent directly from meetings or related to what was said in those meetings can have the effect of making meetings regulated by the safe space policy feel unsafe to some members. Members are, therefore, asked to bear in mind the following guidelines:


Members in a semi-public forum when discussing matters relating to EUSA are also representatives of EUSA.

Disagreements should be aired in a respectful manner: it is often good to disagree; it is rarely productive to be disagreeable.

Disagreements, where they are to be aired, should focus on differences of opinion and not on individuals.

When posting on social media sites, consider whether what you are posting would be something that you would say in a meeting regulated by the Safe Space policy, or directly to the person(s) affected. If not, consider the impact that this may have on other members and whether you really wish to post this comment in this way.

Passed by Student Council on 25 September 2014.


A Zero Tolerance Policy and its consequences


“Zero tolerance policy imposes automatic punishment for infractions of a stated rule, with the intention of eliminating undesirable conduct. Zero-tolerance policies forbid persons in positions of authority from exercising discretion or changing punishments to fit the circumstances subjectively; they are required to impose a pre-determined punishment regardless of individual culpability, extenuating circumstances, or history. This pre-determined punishment need not be severe, but it is always meted out.”[2]


This kind of policy is categorical,


http://bit.ly/22haaJZ


even when it is not draconian. The lack of discretionality, however, may in itself be perceived as draconian (I would).


Seriousness of purpose is matched by the severity of the punishment: expulsion. Immediate ostracism[3] is the rule – by majority vote. The motion to expel can be tabled by “any student” and not just the alleged victim (point 7 above). In fact, there may not even be a victim.


“Unacceptable conduct” is not defined through verifiable actions (e.g. “broken window”) but behavior (and words): we are away from the pro-active XIXth century adage:


Sticks and stones will break my bones, but words will never harm me.


Gestures, sensory cues, and words (symbolic signs) are an intrinsic part of the adaptive capacity of any living being and a strategy for its survival.[4] Consciously or unconsciously, communication of provisional or emergent intentions takes place in infinite ways (we are just beginning to explore this world). Mimetism is the alternative strategy (nature is never categorical).


In higher social groups, signaling is intensified as a means to offset the tension from closeness with the benefits from collective action. There, signals are useful if they are ambiguous, leaving the recipient free to choose among many options rather than react in automatic or mechanical fashion. Ambiguity facilitates adaptive pentiment and saving face.


For, forming an intention is a complex and time-consuming process. In each new situation, we need to strike a corresponding balance between emotions and rationality. This is a process of discovery in the situation which relies on trial and error. Ambiguity serves us best. The same principle applies to developing collective intentions among a group of humans.


Social life then is a dance of ambiguity. We employ signs and words straight; at times, we rely on a shared silent complicity. We can use “dog whistle” sentences that rely on absences or e contrario statements to make points. A Zero Tolerance Policy (ZTP) would tend to hamper or disallow ambiguity.


There is more. Expressing inchoate and even destructive emotions in a group helps in taming passions and coming to a considered yes. We shout each other into reason. Group dynamics should lead to an emotional and rational convergence – disrupting this process through ZTP leads to brittle agreements.


ZTP would have collateral effects: (a) it distracts participants from the task at hand by imposing on them ongoing multi-dimensional self-control; (b) it forces participants preventively to second-guess the reaction of the many “others;” (c) like Damocles sword, it threatens to disrupt the dialogue at any time. Enforcing ZTP goes at the expense of substance.


ZTP tends to ignore the context. Students are free to choose between participating or not. They will join in a cooperative activity only is it yields a reasonable satisfaction. This experience depends on both endogenous and exogenous factors,[5] but it must be gratifying. ZTP might be gratifying to the stigmatized minority, but severely constrains even innocent behavior of the others.


ZTP, finally, easily becomes prey to partisanship. ZTP motions can be tabled by anyone at any time to intimidate opponents, since violations are inevitable. Majorities are easily gathered as no one wants to be shown up as being soft on ZTP. A loose majority on procedure might oppress a minority arguing substance.


A right/obligation to feel discriminated?


Ten areas of “non-discrimination” have been listed. The list is incomplete, and in any case open-ended. [6] Ironically, any affirmative action in favor of victims is in itself a form of discrimination – only at a higher level. A “club of all victims” does not eliminate their status as victims, it just creates a larger pool and amplifies the guilt feelings of the perpetrators by making them collectively responsible for all. Consequently, the approach is itself paternalistic: it stigmatizes the victims as unable to fend for themselves.[7] If ascertaining the stigma is a prerequisite, it is not the core challenge ahead. We need to enable the victim to overcome the stigma and no longer feel victimized.


The list grants the persons concerned an unassailable right/obligation “to feel offended.” It creates a rent. People readily abuse the situation, as one observes at football (Italian) matches. As a rhetorical tool, claiming victimhood is very effective.


Becoming zombies


Under point 6 we have a list of inadmissible gestures. Following instructions to the letter, participants would be deprived of any spontaneity – what is expected is perfect mimetism. One wonders: is reading the paper, filing one’s nails or even nodding off an infringement of ZTP? The inevitable outcome is participation as a zombie.


Eliminating all “negative” gestures fosters a climate of contrived consensus based on tolerance. To a speaker, however, the live interaction with the audience is critical. The speaker does not simply recite – unless he is speaking to TV-cameras – but adapts his message to signs that the audience understands or supports/rejects the point. Ironically, this victimizes the victim most: the right to speak codes to a right to be ignored.


I doubt finally whether ostracism is the right tool in dealing with stigma. We do not change people by shutting them up, rather by giving them safe experiences that show a possible way forward. If change is to occur, it must not be threatening. Socially validated experience changes us, isolation makes us extreme. Ostracism – the deliberate exclusion from social intercourse – denies the target its fundamental dignity.


Is Generation Y less able to deal with direct social intercourse?


Generation Y is the first generation to have used iPhones, tablets and PC for interpersonal communication. A screen and (often rudimentary) written texts have to a significant extent replaced or at least supplemented direct contact and interaction. One wonders whether enough experience has been accumulated, or whether the interposing of the screen has not dulled, or even crippled, the ability to interact socially.


Poorly written, overlong yet vague and hapless, the Safe Policy Rules of Generation Y hint at a set of people who are insecure in a social setting and desperately try to hide their ineptness in bureaucratic jargon.


ZTP aims for mimetism and its intellectual correlate hermetism – not heightened social interaction. The ZTP logic intimates at the elimination of a meeting altogether. A structured social media chat on a virtual platform would do just as well. ZTP is harkening back to the safe cocoon of the screen in one’s den, which allows ostracism by zapping.


More fundamentally: ZTP treats stigmatization symptomatically, by suppressing it, rather than addressing the root causes. It is an admission of collective impotence.


365


Octopus are perfect mimetists, very clever, and very solitary.


_______________________


[1]           http://bit.ly/1oLHxHB


[2]           https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero_tolerance


[3]           Originally, ostracism was a complex and semi-religious procedure. It was an extra-judiciary ritual that demanded no justification: it was the naked expression of the people’s sovereignty. At the same time, it was limited to one person per year – making him a sort of scapegoat. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ostracism


[4]           See e.g. Amotv ZAHAVI – Avishab ZAHAVI (1997): The handicap principle. A missing piece in Darwin’s puzzle. Oxford University Press, Oxford. This for mammals – but it also applis to “lesser” beings. We now speak of “socio-microbiology:” See: Carl ZIMMER (2015): A weakness in bacteria’s fortress. Scientific American CCXI, 1


[5]           Albert O. HIRSCHMAN (2002): Shifting involvements. Private interest and public action. Princeton University, Princeton.


[6]           It behooves students, who do not work, to ignore occupation as a source of discrimination – except in the case of whores (but not gigolos) as in point 3.


[7]           http://bit.ly/1Ni2Jey


April 11, 2016Leave a Reply

364 – What is segregation?

“Identity politics is back,” opines a comment to 362. I admit to having difficulties with the concept of “identity.” To put my queasiness into perspective, let me take a roundabout way and reflect on “segregation” instead.


The article: This simple experiment shows how easy it is for society to become segregated[1] which I shall discuss presently, allows me to visit the issue in a somewhat structured way.


What is segregation?


The two authors of the article do not define segregation:


But that’s not how society works. In reality, segregation is widespread: in residential neighborhoods, at the workplace, in schools, even online.


If one posits “segregation,” one should indicate what “non-segregation” looks like. The text is unclear on this point. From the experiment the two authors engage in, one might infer that for them “segregation” is any non-Brownian (or random) array of people scattered across a homogenous space.


From the asserted wide presence of segregation, the authors draw the policy conclusion:


And segregation is not a good thing: people who are physically separated are unlikely to exchange ideas, share resources, or resolve problems. Segregation worsens inequality and conflict.


The article introduces this map so as to prove its premise that segregation is rampant:


364


Racial segregation in New York City. Image Copyright, 2013, Weldon Cooper Center for Public Service, Rector, and Visitors of the University of Virginia (Dustin A. Cable, creator)


Segregation in New York is not a matter of law. We are talking here about de facto segregation. What might be its origins?


Segregation as optical or definitional artifice


Aggregation rules and coarse grain may help explain what appears on the map as segregation. If most resident couples were mixed, e.g., would this show up on the map or would the aggregation rules and color dominance overwhelm the actual distribution? Just a question.


A further point is definitional. The map highlights four “races” and disallows crossbreeds. Assigning people of mixed parentage to either race is far from objective.[2] Even self-declaration (e.g. in New Zealand) is a dubious criterion when it codes to affirmative action. On this basis, segregation might appear stronger than in reality.


The map highlights the place of residence – where people sleep. Is this the relevant criterion nowadays? How would a map based on “place of work” or “place of social interaction” look? In the past, the railway tracks separated two social worlds, and one race alone moved, just to work. Is this still the case? If it is good to “exchange ideas, share resources, or resolve problems,” does it have to be all the time and by residence rather than by presence?


Agglomerations as fractal constructs


Agglomerations follow fractal rules.[3]


364a


London: 1786 to 2010. http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.92.062130 


The fractal character of agglomerations is very old and has e.g. underlain ancient African cities.[4] It may shape all sorts of settlement patterns, which change over time, yet leave a historical trace. For our purposes, the insight indicates that what appears as segregation may at least in part reflect settlement patterns old and new who have little to do with de facto segregation.


A “simple” experiment?


To explain the perceived pattern of segregation, the authors claim: “the Nobel Prize-winning economist Thomas Schelling proposed a model. Schelling imagined a world where two types of individuals (we’ll make them blue and yellow) are randomly located on a flat square world. In Schelling’s model, individuals prefer to have some similar neighbors, but they do not discriminate against different neighbors – in short, they are tolerant. If individuals are unhappy with their neighborhood, they can freely move to a neighborhood with a preferable composition. In the example below, the yellow individual is unhappy about her assigned location because she does not have enough yellow neighbors, so she decides to move to a new neighborhood. But when she moves, the composition of both her old and new neighborhoods change. As a result, an old yellow neighbor and a new blue neighbor also decide to move. This causes a domino effect that leads neighborhoods to separate into yellow and blue ghettos. In the end, although no single individual prefers it, everyone ends up in segregated neighborhoods.”


364b


Domino effects in the Schelling model of segregation.


The first assumption – that people are located randomly on a flat square world – is dodgy. The second assumption is even worse: that people are either yellow or blue. That is, they have but one and invariant identity.


There is no basis for this assumption – it is a requirement of the mathematical instrument used. People have many identities, which they continuously fore- or background depending on the situation.[5] It is this ability to switch that gives the illusion of only having one – it is a form of availability bias.


The article’s authors “improve” on the Schelling model by going beyond tolerance – which to them is akin to indifference – and explicitly aiming for diversity. Unsurprisingly, the authors get what they want – integration.


They conclude: “Segregation is not unavoidable, but there is a need to continue educating people about the benefits of diversity and to continue devising policies and incentives that prevent or ease segregation.”


When assumptions are questionable


Strip away the sociological context and the “simple experiment” proves what popular wisdom knew all along: “birds of a feather flock together.” It looks as if the models just explain murmuration (which employs similar rules):


364c


I would shy away, however, from suggesting any policy based on such simple models.


[1]           http://bit.ly/1RZ5qce


[2]           Traditionally, in the US one “drop” of black blood made a person “black” – unless the person could pass off as white. As long as slavery existed, “blackness” coded to the slave owner’s property: race was defined to maximize it. While slavery as such was eliminated, the census and the birth certificate failed to recognize the new reality.


[3]           Michael BATTY – Paul LONGLEY (1994): Fractal cities: a geometry of form and function.  Academic Press, San Diego. Fractal patterns repeat themselves over different length scales: If you zoom in on one small portion of a fractal, you’ll find a motif nearly identical to the pattern as a whole. Over time, the fractal network of streets may change from being multifractal, scaling spatially according to multiple rules, to mono-fractal, with a single scaling rule (e. London).


[4]           Ron EGLASH (2005): African fractals. Modern computing and indigenous design. Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick.


[5]           Amartya SEN (2015): Identity and violence. The illusion of destiny. Penguin, New York.


April 8, 2016Leave a Reply

363 – The baneful role of gerrymandering in US history

In the process of setting electoral districts, gerrymandering is a practice that attempts to establish a political advantage for a particular party or group by manipulating district boundaries to create partisan-advantaged districts.[1]


Of course, manipulating district boundaries is a wide-spread partisan political practice. It is my contention, however, that this phenomenon has been at the core of state formation in the US and heavily influenced its history ever since. Musing on the hidden consequences may help understand the current predicament of the country.


363


The mother of all gerrymandering – the 3/5 rule in the US Constitution


Now largely forgotten, the 3/5 compromise was set out in the US Constitution:


“The Three-Fifths Compromise was a compromise reached between delegates from southern states and those from northern states during the 1787 United States Constitutional Convention. The debate was over whether, and if so, how, slaves would be counted when determining a state’s total population for legislative representation and taxing purposes. The issue was important, as this population number would then be used to determine the number of seats that the state would have in the US House of Representatives as well as the Electoral College for the next ten years. The effect was to give the southern states a third more seats in Congress and a third more electoral votes than if slaves had been ignored (but fewer than if counts of slaves and free persons had been lumped together), allowing the slaveholder interests to dominate largely the government of the United States until 1861.”[2] The 13th and 14th Amendment nullified the Compromise.


It is probably fair to say that this compromise, together with the Connecticut Compromise,[3] made the approval of the US Constitution possible. The predominance of slave interests in the House led to Anti-Slavery Gag Rules in the House during the period 1836-44[4] and the approval of rotten compromises over the admission of states to the Union ensued. These compromises aimed to protect the 3/5 rule as the country expanded.


In effect, the slow deliberation over the “good life” of the country (with/without slavery) was wrapped into a procedural rule and reduced to a yes/no on the latter. There could be no evolutionary compromise over the rule.[5] Polarization ensued, which was resolved by civil war.


From Jim Crow to scientific gerrymandering (and more)


The usefulness of manipulating procedural rules in achieving political ends was a lesson unlikely to be forgotten. The next avatar were the Jim Crow laws[6] which achieved de facto discrimination while seemingly being evenhanded. Again, Jim Crow ruled by indirection: formal equality knowingly imposed on an unequal situation.


Though eliminated from the US Constitution, gerrymandering was widely practiced at the state level. It has now become a science.[7] The system has become entrenched. According to Lynn Westmoreland, the Republican redistricting vice chair in the House, this ritual mapmaking is “the nastiest form of politics that there is.” Gerrymandering just about ensures a Republican majority in the House of Representatives at every election. Pushback against extremes is slow:[8] State Supreme Courts may have to intervene to review the redistricting proposals.


Partisanship has also infected election administration – the most blatant case being the chads in Florida 1999. The system’s dysfunctions are significant.[9] Overall, the US fares poorly in international comparisons: The Perception of Electoral Integrity Index for 2012-2015 puts the US with 62 at the bottom of the second-tier “high” scale (60-70) – the worst score among Western countries.[10]


Has gerrymandering shaped US political culture in any way?


Historians will argue over the effect of gerrymandering on the history of the US. My conjecture is that historians underestimate its import. To me at least, justice nullified is far worse and galling than justice denied. It rubs in my helplessness by confronting me with naked power.


I would consider the question of whether gerrymandering has also helped shape current political culture in the country as interesting. Again, my conjecture is that gerrymandering has played a role, in ways that are subtle, or often silent, yet highly relevant.


The process of formalizing all knowledge to the exclusion of any tacit knowledge is self-defeating.


Michael POLANYI


Procedures are meant to organize political processes so that they can unfold in time in an orderly fashion.[11] Procedures are enablers meant to be as neutral as possible between outcomes. When procedures are grossly misused for partisan advantage, they become akin to rents in economics – unearned (political) incomes arising from a legal discontinuity. Like all rents, legal discontinuities are divisive. Devoid of content, rents become a dispute of the wills or a test of power and soon become shouting matches. By shielding the haves, captive procedures breed arrogance in them and rage among the have-nots. Gerrymandering plays a critical role in shaping the political process in the US, and it is permissible to see it as a major and divisive rent factor.


Procedural discussions background the complex substance and spread a veil of ignorance over it. The procedural point becomes symbolic and abstract, but all-encompassing and reductive. A legalistic approach ensues, in which those arguing from substance face an uphill battle. One wonders whether the legalism that bedevils the US political system might also have its origins in a habit of substituting procedure for substance, a habit going back to the original Constitution.


Gerrymandering produces “safe seats” and is akin to “political segregation.” This phenomenon has unexpected consequences: “Political extremism is often a product of group polarization, and social segregation is a useful tool for producing polarization.”[12] The political process within a safe seat no longer needs to be inclusive or acknowledge diversity. The opposition no longer has a voice. Under such circumstances, politicians vie for prominence within the club by becoming more extreme in their views – not unlike peacocks.


Is it a fluke that the two most extreme GOP hopefuls to come up through the party ranks – Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio – come from states that have about the worst record in gerrymandering?


______________________


[1]           https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerrymandering


[2]           https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-Fifths_Compromise. For a scholarly treatment, see e.g.: Leonard L. RICHARDS (2000): The slaver power. The Free North and Southern Domination 1780-1860. Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge.


[3]           https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connecticut_Compromise


[4]           Richard H. SEWELL (1976): Ballots for Freedom: Antislavery Politics in the United States, 1837–1860. New York: Oxford University Press


[5]           The indirect way of dealing with the issue of slaver allowed for myths to emerge.


[6]              C. Vann WOODWARD (1974): The strange career of Jim Crow. Oxford University Press, New York. Also: Michelle ALEXANDER (2012): The new Jim Crow. Mass incarceration in the age of colorblindness. The New Press, New York.


[7]           Robert DRAPER (2012): The league od dangerous mapmakers. The Atlantic, October.


[8]           State having a history of election discrimination are covered by Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act, which requires that electoral maps be approved by either a federal court or the Justice Department. But the targeted discrimination is racial, not political.


[9]         See the Reports of the Presidential Commission on Election Administration: https://www.supportthevoter.gov/

[10]          http://bit.ly/1Y6L5QR


[11]          Paul PIERSON (2004): Politics in time. History, institutions, and social analysis. Princeton University Press, Princeton.


[12]             Cass H. SUNSTEIN (2009): Going to extremes. How like minds unite and divide. Oxford University press, Oxford.


April 4, 20161 Reply

362 – The Trump swerve

 Where minds differ and opinions swerve there is scant a friend in that company.


Elizabeth I


Donald Trump, a New York based businessman, formally announced his candidacy for the presidency in the 2016 election on June 16, 2015. Trump said, “We are going to make our country great again;” he pledges to restore the “American dream … bigger and better and stronger than ever before” and also announced that he would be the “greatest jobs president that God ever created.”[1]


On that day, world history swerved [to swerve: to turn aside abruptly in movement or direction; deviate suddenly from the straight or direct course].


362a


Ever since, the pundits have agonized over whether Donald Trump will win the nomination, whether he will be elected or over the possible impact of his jingoism on world affairs. The unspoken hope is that Trump can be stopped by rational analysis.


I beg to differ. With Donald Trump, a kind of political discourse has suddenly emerged at the core of the US and international politics which will transcend the billionaire’s subsequent fate at the hustings. Trumpism is now an undeniable fact of political life future US President or world leaders will ignore at their peril.


Better to understand the emergence of the phenomenon, let me introduce an analogy from genetics.


Our observation of the mechanical world has created a habit (Einstellung) of explaining a physical event by direct causation:


Cause => effect


This mechanistic model is one-directional. The effect is subject to the cause and cannot influence it. The model is not homeostatic or self-regulating.


In biology,[2] however, we obtain the same result in a roundabout way: a double-negative mechanism regulates the expression of the effect. The direct relationship is present all along. A suppressor keeps the cause in check. Only by removing the suppressor, do we get expression. As a result, the system is homeostatic and self-regulating.


Trump did not create trumpism. Trumpism was there all along, yet hardly articulated: we can easily spot the precursors (remember James Buchanan or Sarah Palin?). It was wild, inchoate rage: a phenomenon at the margins of the polity. Silent social controls kept trumpism in check. By articulating the passionate rage, Donald Trump removed the social inhibitors. Now this approach to politics has become mainstream. Using a historical analogy, the Yellow River of US politics has swerved and changed course. An unpredictable singularity has taken place.


362b


Trump’s jingoist slogan: make our country great again is so strong emotionally that any incumbent will heed it. The political system’s homeostatic regulators (the dikes of the Yellow River) have been overwhelmed.


In international relations first, this translates into: “We bring ‘order’ – you pay.” How will it resonate? It is colonialism by another name. The world has moved on, meanwhile.


After WWI, the hesitant transition of hegemonic rule from Great Britain to the US severely weakened the international relations system. Today, we should be moving from a hegemonic to a multipolar world – a far more difficult undertaking. The swerve of the US will have repercussions. Russia is big on jingoism already. ISIS is a very extreme form of jingoism (but not the only example in the region). Jingoism is North Korea’s business model. In many avatars, jingoism is likely to spread like wildfire – it is catching. Jingoism, resentment, and revanchism[3] are likely to hamper the transition to multi-polarity.


The second consequence is at the national level in the US. At the moment, it is still hidden. Its import is no less fraught with danger. Trump is carrying out a hostile take-over of the Republican Party. In a reversal of direction, legitimacy will flow from him to the GOP, rather than the other way round. The party is about to become Donald Trump’s tool to ascendency (ironically, this is the Ottoman inheritance model: fratricide was the prescribed way to power). Donald Trump aims to cause his own legitimacy – to become the providential man.[4]


The fear that a majority may oppress the minorities puts any democratic political system at risk as the minorities without a voice in the outcome[5] threaten or even chose to exit.[6] The US Constitution is a homeostatic system aimed to contain these fears. Legitimacy is the desired outcome. Over time, impersonal institutions secure legitimacy best. Personalization of legitimacy destroys the institutional legitimacy and then the institutions themselves. Arbitrariness ensues.


Well before he tried to conquer the world, Adolph Hitler destroyed the German Constitution and the German state. Had he died in 1938, the country would have looked in vain for a legitimate way forward.[7]


Trump’s attack on the legitimacy of the GOP is an attack on the spirit and the legitimacy of the US political system. Like all revolutions, it is at first destructive: it exposes the systems weakness or even brings it down altogether. No matter that Donald Trump might fail – he will be followed by a cleverer politician.[8]


The Trump swerve has expanded the horizon of the politically possible. Whatever the outcome next November, Donald Trump has already made the world and the US a more fragile place.


362c


_______________


[1]           http://bit.ly/22R3Ga8


[2]              See: Sean B. CARROLL (2006): The Serengeti rules. The quest to discover how life works and why it matters. Princeton University Press, Princeton.


[3]           One could make the case that WWI was the accidental outcome of the interplay of such forces, which overwhelmed the rudimentary international system of the times. See Christopher CLARK (2015): the sleepwalkers. Penguin, Londom


[4]           In Fascist Italy, the apotheosis of the leader was official policy. “When you are looking around and don’t know who to turn to any more,” the Corriere della Sera reassured its readers in 1936, “you remember that He is there. Who but He, can help you?” The writer was referring not to God, but to Benito Mussolini. Italians, he went on to say, should write personally to the Duce whenever doubts or difficulties overcame them. “He is the confidant of everyone and, as far as he can, he will help anyone.” Italians appear to have believed this, at least as far as one can tell from the letters (about 1,500 per day) they wrote to him: “I turn to You who does all and can do everything”; “Duce, I venerate you as the Saints should be venerated.” Quoted from: Christopher M. CLARK (2016): Deep in the volcano. NYRB LXIII,5


[5]           In social policy discourse the “equality of individual opportunity” has replaced the “equality of individual outcome” as the desired social goal. This does not translate into politics, where factions vie for determining the way forward. Broad cooptation is the ultimate success of a policy. Groups who voice their concerns without results express their perception of impotence and frustration in rage.


[6]           Albert O. HIRSCHMAN (1970): Exit, voice, and loyalty. Responses to decline in firms, organizations, and states. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.


[7]           Sebastian HAFFNER (1979): The meaning of Hitler. Orion Books, London.


[8]           The end of the Roman Republic was a drawn-out affair, with several personalities undertaking in turn the de-legitimization of the state. Augustus completed the task, while retaining the trappings. See Richard ALSTON (2015): Rome’s revolution. Death of the Republic and birth of the Empire.  Oxford University Press, Oxford.


April 1, 20162 Replies

361 – On the limits of international law

Analogies allow us to illuminate issues from a different point of view and break out of our self-regarding Einstellung – the belief that, having “done the right thing,” we can move on secure in the success and contented.


Analogies, then, are reflective or analytical, not prescriptive tools.


*


In 1977, William J. LeMessurier,[1] a structural engineer, designed the steel skeleton of a New York skyscraper for Citicorp:


361


Daringly, LeMessurier placed the four columns holding up the building in the center of each side – a highly unusual feature. To compensate for it, our engineer had inserted wind braces sufficiently strong to withstand winds perpendicular to the building. He had not considered quartering winds: wind blowing obliquely to a specified direction – because the New York building code did not require it.


Subsequent calculations revealed that such quartering winds would increase the strain on the braces by 40%. Braces work best when fitted with welding points. Unbeknownst to LeMessurier, the design team, had used structurally weaker bolts – this saved money. Also, the team had redefined the braces as trusses, not columns (the building code is far less rigorous for trusses) and further reduced the number of bolts. In short, wind-tunnel tests showed that, under the effect of strong quartering winds, the building would vibrate dangerously like a pitch fork. LeMessurier convinced Citicorp. to retrofit the building – at night time, lest it result in poor publicity.


I would highlight a few points for reflection:


Rather than being a guide to a better understanding of reality, the building code had become an institutional barrier. It became unquestioned “best practice.” The blinkers affected not only the structural engineer but more importantly, his principal, who wanted to contain costs. The overarching goal: “a safe building” was reformulated as a “rule-conform building;”

Communication between the principal – the structural engineer – and the agents – the design team – turned out to be poor. The principal’s goal of having a structurally sound building was modified, at the agent level, by inserting goals of other principals – cost containment. There was no discussion or even feedback between agent and principal;

The overarching trade-off: security vs. cost was never spelled out properly (nor could it have been – it remained schematic). Many agents acted independently in the situation without coordination. Inconsistencies abounded;

The architects designed, but insufficiently tested the building;

The flaw, once detected, was far from self-correcting. The structural engineer had left the job. He revisited the issue by chance, freely, and at his risk. Meanwhile, the owner’s goal in the situation had changed as well: no longer was the calculable cost containment paramount, but the incalculable loss of prestige.

International law is akin to creating a “building code.” It is a rough approximation of reality. It necessarily contains unknown flaws and murky compromises reflecting the interests of the principals in drafting it. In fact, “constructive ambiguities” are often at the core of an agreement. A code is useful in guiding action – a checklist and orientation. When this code, however, replaces reality, and principals narrowly (and hypocritically) follow (or outwit) it, disaster looms.


By necessity, the critical trade-offs are only spelled out schematically. Safety vs. costs; lives vs. effectiveness in war – many people will have to make decisions in the context without sufficient guidance or experience. We spend more time learning the rules rather than testing how properly to make trade-offs.


In international law, mending and amending the rules is a difficult undertaking. Precedent and the pursuit of stability make revisions difficult. They are soon out of date – yet immutable. Whistle-blowing is unwelcome, for it implies the loss of international image.


Personally, I find the current legalistic approach worrying for, in their frenzy to codify action; the lawyers are constructing an ersatz version of reality. When Ersatz meets reality, it is found to have flaws. This discrepancy results all around in the perception of hypocrisy. The outcome is a loss of trust, with participants taking refuge behind paragraphs in close combat over interpretation. The solution has become part of the problem.
